---
title: "Chapter 16: Value Traders"
description: "Value traders, fundamental analysis, and valuation strategies"
weight: 160
---
# Chapter 16: Value Traders

*Value traders* are speculators who form opinions about instrument
values by using all information available to them. They buy instruments
that they believe are undervalued and sell instruments that they believe
are overvalued. We describe their speculative trading strategies in
[chapter 10](#part0020.html_ch10).

Value traders are also liquidity providers, though they often do not see
themselves this way. This chapter explains how and when value traders
offer liquidity. We shall see that they are the ultimate suppliers of
market liquidity. They trade when no one else will. We therefore must
understand this aspect of value trading to fully understand who makes
markets liquid.

Value traders who understand that they supply liquidity will trade more
successfully than will those who do not realize this. By considering the
implications of their roles as liquidity suppliers, value traders will
make better decisions about when to trade and at what price to trade. If
you are interested in being a value trader, the principles discussed in
this chapter will be of particular concern to you.

Dealers often trade with value traders when they want to restore their
target inventories. Dealers therefore have mixed feelings about value
traders. On the one hand, they compete with them to provide liquidity.
On the other hand, they depend upon them for liquidity when they are
unwilling to carry large inventory positions. If you are a dealer or if
you are interested in being a dealer, you need to thoroughly understand
how dealers relate to value traders.

Value traders must confront an economic problem called the winner's
curse to trade successfully. Traders suffer the *winner's curse* when
they win an auction and subsequently regret that they traded because
they paid too much or sold for too little. Everyone who competes with
others to buy or sell items faces the winner's curse. You need to know
about the winner's curse when you buy a house, when you trade on eBay,
and when you bid on a job. Even if you do not intend to trade securities
or contracts, you should find this chapter useful.

## 16.1 VALUE TRADERS SUPPLY LIQUIDITY

Although value traders trade to make speculative profits, the effect of
their trading is to provide liquidity to the market. This
characterization of their trading is apparent when you consider when
they trade profitably.

Value trading is profitable only when price differs from fundamental
value. Price can differ from fundamental value two ways:

• When new information causes fundamental value to change, and thereby
deviate from price, or

• When uninformed traders push price away from fundamental value.

In the first case, news traders profit because---by definition---they
are the first to receive new information. Their trading tends to push
price to the new fundamental value. ([Chapter
10](#part0020.html_ch10) discusses information flow trading.)
In the second case, value traders profit. Through their research, they
are able to determine that price no longer reflects fundamental value.
Their trading tends to push price back to its fundamental value. Value
trading therefore is profitable only when value traders trade in
response to demands for liquidity made by uninformed traders.

In the following discussion, we will need to refer frequently to "the
uninformed traders whose demands for liquidity cause prices to change."
To simplify our discussion, we will simply call them the *uninformed
liquidity demanders*. They may be one or more large traders, or they may
be numerous small traders who all want to trade on the same side of the
market. They cause prices to change as they try to fill their orders.

### 16.1.1 Uninformed Traders Cause Prices to Deviate from Fundamental Values

Price deviates from fundamental value when uninformed traders demand
liquidity, and when the traders who offer them liquidity do not realize
that they are uninformed. This situation often happens when dealers do
not know their clients well. To protect themselves from adverse
selection losses to informed traders, dealers must make inferences from
their order flow. If uninformed traders dominate the order flow on the
same side of the market, dealers will mistake those traders for informed
traders and adjust prices accordingly. These price adjustments cause
price to deviate from fundamental value.

Dealers also may adjust prices even when they know that their clients
are uninformed. When dealers supply liquidity only on one side of the
market, their inventories diverge from their target levels. The
resulting off-target inventories expose them to substantial inventory
risks. If their uninformed clients demand more liquidity than dealers
are willing to supply, dealers will demand substantial price concessions
to bear the resulting inventory risk. These price adjustments will be
especially large when dealers fear that they will not easily find
traders on the other side of the market.

Uninformed traders may also cause prices to deviate from fundamental
values in order-driven markets that do not have dealers. In such
markets, prices change when traders demand liquidity on one side of the
market and exhaust the liquidity supplied there.

### 16.1.2 How Value Traders Respond

Value traders may trade directly with the uninformed liquidity
demanders, or they may trade indirectly with them through the
intermediation of dealers and other traders who employ dealing
strategies. Value traders trade directly with them when value traders
offer limit orders that the uninformed liquidity demanders take, or when
block brokers ask value traders to fill orders for their uninformed
liquidity-demanding clients. In these situations, value traders supply
immediacy to the uninformed liquidity demanders because they allow them
to trade when they want to trade.

Value traders also indirectly supply liquidity to the uninformed
liquidity demanders. We can best introduce this situation with an
example.

Suppose that uninformed liquidity demanders want to sell stock in a
hurry. They sell to dealers who offer them immediacy. The dealers
accumulate large long positions as they buy the inventory. Since they do
not know their clients very well, they suspect that the uninformed
liquidity demanders may be informed traders.
The dealers therefore adjust their prices accordingly. They also adjust
their prices because they fear that they will not easily find traders on
the other side of the market, in which case they will be exposed to more
inventory risk than they would like to bear. These adjustments cause
price to fall below fundamental value so that value trading becomes
profitable. To restore their target inventories, the dealers lower their
quotes. Value traders buy from the dealers at their ask prices when they
see that they can buy substantial size at discounted prices.

The dealers solicit liquidity from the value traders by lowering their
asking prices. When the value traders respond, they take liquidity from
the dealers in the form of immediacy, but simultaneously supply
liquidity to the dealers in the form of size or *depth*. In effect, the
value traders indirectly supply liquidity to the uninformed liquidity
suppliers through the intermediation of the dealers.

Even though the dealers lay off their inventory on the value traders,
both sets of traders may profit. The dealers will profit if they sell
their inventories at prices above what they paid to the uninformed
liquidity demanders. The value traders will profit when prices return to
fundamental values.

### 16.1.3 Market Resiliency

When uninformed traders cannot change prices substantially, the market
is *resilient* to their trading. Value traders make markets resilient by
standing ready to trade when prices move away from fundamental values.

Dealers will take larger positions when trading with their uninformed
clients in resilient markets than in markets that lack resiliency. In
resilient markets, dealers know that they can rely upon value traders to
restore their target inventories if their order flows remain unbalanced.

## 16.2 THE OUTSIDE SPREAD AND ITS DETERMINANTS

The prices at which a value trader is willing to trade define his or her
*outside spread*. Since value traders are well-informed traders, they
rarely quote these prices. They do not want to reveal their value
estimates, and they do not want to give free trading options to the
market.

The spreads of value traders depend on the risks and costs of their
business. When they are large, their spreads will be large. This section
considers what determines the outside spread.

### 16.2.1 The Risks of Value Trading

Value traders face two serious risks when they trade: averse selection
and the winner's curse. Like dealers, value traders face adverse
selection when they supply liquidity to better-informed traders. They
face the winner's curse when they have misestimated instrument values.

The two risks are closely related. Both arise when value traders are not
fully informed. When they suffer adverse selection, they lack
information that better-informed traders have. When they suffer the
winner's curse, they have mistakenly valued their instruments.

#### 16.2.1.1 The Adverse Selection Risk

Value traders are subject to adverse selection risk because they offer
liquidity in response to other traders who demand it. They must be
particularly careful that they do not trade
with news traders who have new information that the value traders do not
have.

When value traders trade with better-informed traders, they buy or sell
instruments that they think are undervalued or overvalued but in fact
are overvalued or undervalued. They eventually lose when prices move
against their positions as traders learn the new information.

Value traders respond to adverse selection risk just as dealers do. They
widen their spreads to recover from uninformed traders what they lose to
better-informed traders. Equivalently, they widen their spreads to
reflect the inferences they will make about values when they learn that
other traders want to trade with them.

Value traders avoid adverse selection risk by trying to know everything
that they can about instrument values. Because research takes time,
value traders are often slow to respond to apparent profit
opportunities.

#### 16.2.1.2 The Winner's Curse and Value Trading

To understand how the winner's curse affects value traders, we must
first describe the winner's curse. This subsection starts with a general
discussion of the problem. Its implications for value trading follow.

***The Winner's Curse***

The winner's curse can affect buyers or sellers. To keep our discussion
simple, we initially consider only how it affects buyers. Once we
understand the problem from the buyer's perspective, the problem from
the seller's perspective is obvious.

Buyers can suffer the winner's curse when they compete to buy something
that has a common, but unknown, value. An item has a *common value* when
its value is the same for everyone. Most trading instruments have common
values because people value them only for the cash flows that they
ultimately will produce. Artworks do not have common values because what
is beautiful to one is often unattractive to another.

When the value of a common value item is uncertain, everyone interested
in owning that item must estimate its value. Since people use different
models and different information to estimate values, they typically
obtain different value estimates. Some estimates will be closer to the
true value than others. Unfortunately, since people do not know true
values, they do not know the errors in their estimates.

Buyers suffer the *winner's curse* when they pay more for an item than
it is worth. Although they win the auction, they are cursed by the price
they pay.

The winner's curse arises because the highest bidders in an auction tend
to be buyers who overestimate values. If they bid at prices near their
value estimates, and if they pay those prices, they will regret trading
if their estimates prove to be too high. On average, those estimates do
prove to be too high because extreme estimates rarely are as accurate as
estimates closer to the mean estimate. Bidders who pay prices near their
estimates of value tend to pay too much if they win the auction.

Buyers avoid the winner's curse by considering the implications of being
the highest bidder in an auction. The highest bidder learns that his
value estimate may be the highest estimate among all buyers. If he knew
this information beforehand, he could have improved his estimate by
lowering it toward the common mean. Buyers avoid the winner's curse by
lowering their bids to reflect the additional
information that they will learn about their value estimates if they win
the auction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Winner's Curse in Oil and Gas Lease Auctions**

The government often auctions oil and gas leases. The winners of these
auctions have the right to explore for and develop oil within a
particular tract.

Before an auction, each company interested in the tract has its
geologists survey the site and produce an estimate of its prospects. The
companies use this information to make their bids.

Until they learned better, oil companies systematically overpaid for
these leases. The leases frequently proved to be less productive than
the geologists expected. The winners confronted their geologists and
asked why they were so optimistic. The geologists responded that they
were correct, on average, about the various tracts that they had valued.
Unfortunately, they overestimated values for the tracts that they won
and slightly underestimated values for the tracts that they lost. The
geologists also pointed out that they usually were glad that they had
not purchased the tracts they had lost at the prices the winning
companies paid for them.

With this evidence, the companies learned that they had failed to
consider the winner's curse when setting their bids. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The adjustments that buyers must make depend on the expected sizes of
their valuation errors, assuming that they win the auction. The expected
winner's valuation error depends on the number of other buyers in the
auction and upon their uncertainty about values.

The winning buyer learns more about his estimate when he wins an auction
competing against many other buyers than against only a few buyers. When
the winner outbids many people, he probably grossly overestimated value
because all other bidders estimated lower values. To avoid the winner's
curse, bidders therefore should lower their bids more when bidding
against many buyers than against just a few.

This result is counterintuitive. Most people believe that they must bid
more aggressively to win an auction when competing against many other
traders. They forget that the object is not to win. The object is to win
at a satisfactory price. It is better to lose than to win and pay too
much.

Another reason why the result is counterintuitive involves market power.
If you are the only bidder, or if you compete with very few bidders, you
may underbid in the hope of winning the auction at a significant
discount to value. If you compete with many other traders, however, this
bidding strategy has little chance of success. Accordingly, you should
bid more aggressively when competing against several traders than
against just one or two. This result is important only if you compete
with very few traders.

Buyers make larger estimation errors when they are uncertain about
values than when they know them well. The most extreme estimation error
therefore will likely be large when buyers do not know values well. To
avoid the winner's curse, bidders should lower their bids more when
values are hard to estimate than when they can easily estimate them
accurately.

To summarize, buyers face the winner's curse when they bid in auctions
for items with common value. They avoid the winner's curse by lowering
their bids to reflect what they learn about their value estimates should
they win the auction. They must lower their bids substantially when they
compete with many other buyers and when they cannot estimate values
accurately. Similar arguments suggest that sellers who will receive the
prices they offer should raise their offers to avoid the winner's curse.

An important implication of the winner's curse is that you do not want
to compete against foolish traders. When people bid foolishly, you have
no choice but to accept that you should lose the auction. You cannot
make money bidding against people whose bidding strategies ensure that
they will lose money. Many Internet entrepreneurs in the late 1990s now
wish that they had understood this principle better.

***The Winner's Curse in Two-sided Auctions***

The winner's curse does not pose a significant problem in a two-sided
single price auction in which buyers and sellers both attempt to value
the item sold. In such auctions, traders who estimate high values are
buyers, and traders who estimate low values are sellers. The traders
with the highest bids and the lowest offers trade with each other at the
price that clears the market. Since the market-clearing price typically
is near the median estimate among all traders, no one faces a serious
winner's curse problem. The various traders are not trading at the
prices they bid and offer. Buyers who
estimate the highest values are saved from
serious losses by sellers who estimate the lowest values, and vice
versa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**If You Are Not a Buyer, Should You Be a Seller?**

Some traders believe that they must act on everything about which they
have an opinion. For example, if they own securities they think are
overvalued, it is not sufficient for them to sell their long positions.
They continue selling until they have established short positions.

The notion that you are either a buyer or a seller is inconsistent with
the optimal response to the winner's curse. The uncertainties in your
estimates of value imply that you should not speculate unless you
believe instruments are very mispriced. Of course, the greater the
mispricing you believe you have identified, the more likely it is that
you have made a mistake. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In continuous markets, traders do trade at the prices that they bid and
offer, and their orders may have significant market impact. They
therefore must be careful about the winner's curse. Although the market
price aggregates the information held by all traders, the process of
aggregation is sequential, not simultaneous. Traders who significantly
under- or overestimate values may therefore lose when they push prices
away from fundamental values. These losses are due to the winner's
curse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Why Were Internet Stocks So Volatile?**

The winner's curse helps explain why Internet stocks were so volatile in
the late 1990s. Since Internet stocks were hard to value and since so
many traders tried to value them, the winner's curse problem was
especially dangerous then to value traders. To protect themselves, they
would trade only at very wide outside spreads. Some of the volatility
was due to the bouncing of prices within the wide outside spreads of
value traders. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Value Traders and the Winner's Curse***

Value traders are exposed to the winner's curse because they trade only
when they believe that price differs significantly from their estimates
of fundamental value. If their estimates are wrong, they may regret
trading.

Value traders misestimate values when they use the wrong economic models
to value their instruments, when they fail to consider significant
information, and when they misinterpret the information that they have.
When they make these mistakes, they trade when they should not. Although
these mistakes do not necessarily cause them to buy overvalued
instruments or sell undervalued instruments, the market impact of their
trades may cause instruments to become undervalued or overvalued. When
value traders value instruments poorly, they lose because their trades
have market impact. They lose because they trade when they should not
trade.

Value traders avoid these losses by widening the spread between the
prices at which they are willing to buy and sell. When the winner's
curse problem is very serious, value traders will have wide outside
spreads.

The outside spreads of value traders overlap when their value estimates
vary. The most aggressive value buyers and sellers are, respectively,
the ones who estimate the highest and lowest values. In extreme cases,
value traders will trade with each other when a very optimistic buyer is
willing to buy at a price above the offer price of a very pessimistic
seller.

### 16.2.2 The Costs of Value Trading

The outside spread must be wide enough to allow value traders to recover
their direct costs of doing business. The most important of these costs
are their expenditures for research.

Successful value traders must ensure that they are very well informed.
They accordingly invest substantial sums to acquire and analyze data.
Their outside spreads must be wide enough to recover these costs. Most
instruments that value traders analyze are
properly priced. Their outside spreads therefore must recover the costs
that they incur analyzing the instruments that they ultimately trade and
also the instruments that do not currently present profitable value
trading opportunities.

## 16.3 OUTSIDE VERSUS DEALER SPREADS

The outside spreads of value traders are much wider than the spreads
that dealers quote. The differences are due to differences in the speeds
at which they trade, the sizes of their positions, their research costs,
their exposures to adverse selection and the winner's curse, and their
total volumes of trade.

Dealers can quote narrow spreads because they trade in and out quickly.
When they can quickly and profitably restore their target inventories,
they do not care whether the market price is close to or far from
fundamental value. They only care about discovering current market
values. When they make a mistake, they usually can correct it quickly,
before prices change too much. Dealers learn about their mistakes when
they see that the order flow is one-sided.

In contrast, value traders usually trade when the order flow is
one-sided. Accordingly, they cannot easily use the order flow to
determine when they are mistaken. When value traders trade, they set
market values rather than simply try to discover them. They therefore
have greater exposure to the winner's curse than dealers do. Value
traders typically learn about their mistakes only after they have
acquired significant positions. If prices subsequently change against
them, they incur substantial losses.

Value traders generally take larger positions than dealers do. They
therefore expose themselves to greater inventory risks than dealers do.
Value traders control their exposure to adverse selection by trying to
be the best-informed traders in the market and by trying to determine
whether the traders to whom they ultimately offer liquidity are
uninformed. Since these research activities are expensive, outside
spreads must be larger than dealer spreads. In contrast, dealers control
their adverse selection exposure by adjusting prices to find market
values, by avoiding well-informed traders, and by refusing to take large
inventory positions.

Since value traders speculate on fundamental values, they must hold
their positions until market prices adjust to reflect the fundamental
values. Such adjustments may take a long time when values are quite
uncertain. During that time, they must finance their positions, which
typically are larger than dealer inventories. Their financing costs
therefore cause outside spreads to be wider than dealer spreads. In
addition, while value traders wait for prices to revert to fundamental
values, new information may arrive that changes values. Such changes
make their positions risky. If the new information is inversely
correlated with their positions, they have suffered adverse selection
from news traders. If the new information is uncorrelated with their
positions, it will be diversifiable. In either event, value traders must
trade at wider spreads than dealers must because they face greater
inventory risks.

Dealer spreads also are narrower than outside spreads because dealers
typically trade much greater volumes than value traders do. They can
therefore spread their fixed costs of doing business over greater
volumes than value traders can.

Finally, dealer spreads are narrower than outside spreads because
dealers often earn the entire spread when
they complete a round-trip trade. The best that a value trader can hope
for is to make half the outside spread when price returns to its
fundamental value.

## 16.4 VALUE TRADERS AND NEWS TRADERS

Value traders and news traders are both well-informed traders. The bases
for their trading profits differ, however. Value traders profit when
prices deviate from fundamental values because uninformed liquidity
demanders have pushed prices way. They offer liquidity to other traders.
News traders profit when they know before others that values have
changed. They generally take liquidity when they trade.

Value traders and news traders often profit at each other's expense.
Value traders lose to news traders when they mistake news traders for
uninformed traders. News traders lose to value traders when they do not
realize that the information upon which they are trading is already in
the price.

To trade successfully as a well-informed trader, you must know when you
are trading as a value trader and when you are trading as an news
trader. The two styles require different trading disciplines.

When you are a value trader, you must be sure that you offer liquidity
only to uninformed liquidity demanders and not also to news traders. You
can trade most confidently when you are certain that you have all
available fundamental information, and when you clearly know that the
traders to whom you are offering liquidity are uninformed. You will
rarely have such information. At best, you should be sure that you have
all publicly available fundamental information. You also should have
some idea why uninformed traders are demanding liquidity. If you do not
consider whether you are indeed best informed, your risk of losing to an
news trader might be greater than you assume.

When you are a news trader, you must be sure that you are truly trading
on fundamental information that is not yet in the price. You can trade
most confidently when you know that nobody else has your information.
You will rarely know this, however. At best, you should know how your
information came to your attention, when it first became available, and
who else might know it. You also should be familiar with the recent
price history of the instrument in which you are interested. The price
history will allow you to form a crude opinion as to whether your
information is already in the price if you know when the information
first became available. If you do not consider whether you are indeed
best informed, your risk of losing to a value trader might be greater
than you assume.

## 16.5 SUMMARY

Value traders supply liquidity to uninformed traders whose trading
pushes prices away from fundamental values. Value traders are liquidity
suppliers of last resort. When no one else will trade---when dealers
have large positions or when liquidity suppliers fear informed
traders---value traders may trade. Since they allow uninformed traders
to trade large positions, they supply depth to the market. Since they
often recognize when uninformed traders have caused prices to move from
fundamental values, they also make markets resilient.

Value traders can afford to take large
positions only by being the best-informed traders in the market. They
risk being wrong, however. They suffer adverse selection when they lose
to news traders who know news that they do not yet know, and they face
the winner's curse when they under-or overestimate values. They widen
their spreads to avoid these risks and to ensure that they recover from
uninformed traders what they occasionally lose to news traders and to
other value traders.

By making markets resilient, value traders allow dealers to offer more
immediacy to uninformed traders than they otherwise would be willing to
offer. Dealers know that they often will be able to lay off their
inventories when value traders closely follow the market. Accordingly,
they are more willing to take large positions because they know that
they may not have to hold them long.

## 16.6 SOME POINTS TO REMEMBER

• Value traders are the ultimate suppliers of liquidity to uninformed
traders.

• The winner's curse hurts traders who make the highest bids or the
lowest offers if they do not anticipate what they will learn about the
values that other traders estimate.

• The outside spread represents the prices at which value traders will
buy and sell.

• The outside spread is wider than the inside spread.

## 16.7 QUESTIONS FOR THOUGHT

• How does the winner's curse affect bidding strategies for
single-family houses?

• How does the liquidity provided by well-informed value traders affect
the losses that other value traders incur when they are mistaken about
instrument values?

• Dealers suffer adverse selection when they trade with news traders. Do
they also suffer adverse selection when they trade with value traders?

• What arguments suggest that value traders should specialize in a
single industry or commodity, and what arguments suggest that they
should diversify across industries or commodities?

• Can you compete in markets in which your competitors do not understand
the winner's curse? Should you?
