---
title: "Chapter 25: Internalization, Preferencing, and Crossing"
weight: 250
---
# Chapter 25: Internalization, Preferencing, and Crossing

Dealers *internalize* orders when they fill their clients' orders.
Brokers *preference* orders when they route their clients' marketable
orders to dealers in exchange for various monetary or nonpecuniary
*payments for order flow.* Brokers also preference when they route their
clients' limit orders to electronic communications networks (ECNs) that
pay them *liquidity fees* when standing limit orders execute. Brokers
*cross* orders internally when they arrange trades among their clients.

Internalization, order preferencing, and internal order crossing all
arrange trades away from organized markets. Traders say that these
practices *fragment* the markets.

Internalization, preferencing, and crossing practices raise important
regulatory questions. Most notably, clients and regulators wonder
whether brokers who engage in these practices meet their obligations to
obtain best execution when filling their clients' orders. Less
obviously, traders and regulators wonder whether these practices hurt
markets by making it more difficult for traders to find each other. All
three practices decrease order transparency. Many people wonder whether
the markets would be better off with a single, consolidated limit order
book to which brokers would send all orders.

In this short chapter, we discuss the issues that underlie these
processes. We shall see that internalization and preferencing may
benefit small market order traders. The practices generally harm limit
order traders, however. Internal order crossing tends to benefit
crossing brokers and their clients at the expense of traders with whom
the clients might otherwise have traded.

Internalization, preferencing, and crossing affect all markets in which
traders can trade away from a central exchange. These practices have
attracted the substantial attention in U.S. equity markets. The
attention undoubtedly comes from the high volumes traded in these
markets, the high degree of transparency in these markets, and the ease
with which traders and regulators can compare dealer and public auction
markets that simultaneously trade similar securities. Most of the
discussion that appears in this chapter therefore draws on examples from
U.S. markets. The forces that cause internalization, order preferencing,
and internal order crossing, however, are present in all markets. If you
understand how these forces work in U.S. equity markets, you will be
able to identify them in all other markets.

We start by discussing best execution and the effects of internalization
and preferencing on commissions. We then turn to the anticompetitive
aspects of internalization and preferencing. The chapter ends with a
short discussion of issues associated with internal order crossing.

## 25.1 BEST EXECUTION PRACTICES

Brokers who internalize and accept payments for order flow have a
significant conflict of interest that concerns clients and regulators.
Brokers address these concerns by trying to
provide *best execution* to their clients. They provide best execution
when they ensure that their clients' orders fill quickly at the best
available prices.

Definitions of best execution are controversial because determining
whether dealers fill orders at the best available prices is difficult.
It is especially difficult when willing traders do not display their
orders and quotes.

**The Primex Auction System**

The Primex Auction System allows participants to expose their marketable
orders to an electronic crowd of traders who may offer improved prices.
The Nasdaq Stock Market operates the system as a facility under an
agreement between Nasdaq and Primex Trading.

Several large financial services firms, which have very large dealing
operations, own Primex Trading. They include Bernard L. Madoff
Investment Securities, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley Dean
Witter and Co., and Salomon Smith Barney. 

*Source:
[[www.primextrading.com](http://www.primextrading.com)].*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Definitions of best execution are also controversial because price is
only one dimension of execution quality. Traders value speed of
execution as well as price. The relative importance of speed and price
depends on order type. Market order traders are primarily concerned with
speed, whereas limit order traders are most concerned about price. All
traders, however, value both dimensions and accept reasonable trade-offs
between speed and price.

Brokers and the dealers to whom they preference orders have created a
standard set of order handling practices that they claim assures best
execution if followed. You may disagree. The procedures vary by order
type.

In U.S. equity markets, dealers claim that they provide best execution
when they fill marketable orders at the national best bid or offer
(NBBO)---the best bid or offer quoted by any other dealer or limit order
trader. This standard applies only to marketable orders that are smaller
than the total displayed quotation size at the best price. Best
execution for larger marketable orders is harder to define because
undisclosed size might also be available at the best price. To attract
order flow, some dealers guarantee to brokers that they will always fill
orders at the NBBO up to a specified maximum size, regardless of the
size displayed in the market.

In some markets, small market orders often trade at better prices than
the best quoted price. In such markets, brokers must obtain average
rates of *price improvement* for small market orders in order to ensure
best execution. Dealers who fill their orders generally use complex
algorithms to provide price improvement given various market conditions.
These algorithms often expose an order to the market at an improved
price. If anyone trades anywhere at that price, dealers then fill the
order at that price.

Best execution standards for standing limit orders also are difficult to
define. Since standing limit orders typically execute at their limit
prices, brokerage clients are most concerned about whether and when
their orders execute. Best execution for orders that are not marketable
upon submission therefore depends on whether and when they execute.

In markets that match public orders to public orders, best execution
standards for standing limit orders are especially difficult to define.
Clients generally expect that their brokers will represent their orders
wherever they have the highest probability of executing. Brokers who
internalize their agency orders or who preference them to dealers must
ensure that they execute at least as soon as they would otherwise
execute in the primary markets. Many dealers who accept limit orders
have *limit order price protection* procedures to provide this standard
of best execution.

The fact that dealers pay for marketable orders suggests---but does not
necessarily imply---that they could provide better execution services
than they do. In particular, dealers may not be providing as much price
improvement for marketable orders as they might. They also may be
extracting too much option value from standing limit orders that brokers
often force them to accept as a condition of receiving marketable
orders. If brokers demanded more price improvement and better limit
order executions, dealers would pay less for their preferenced order
flows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Best Execution of Limit
Orders by Third Market Dealers in NYSE-listed Stocks**

Many third market dealers who accept agency limit orders for NYSE-listed
stocks use some version of the following algorithm to provide best
execution for limit buy orders. They use similar procedures for limit
sell orders.

If the limit order bids a better price than the dealer is bidding, the
dealer will adjust his bid to reflect the limit order price and size. If
the two prices are the same, but the limit order bids for more size than
does the dealer, the dealer will increase his bid size to the order
size.

While the limit price matches the best bid in the market, the dealer
will match any marketable sell orders that he receives with the limit
buy order. If a trade occurs anywhere at a price below the limit order
price, the dealer will fill the limit order for his own account at the
limit price. The dealer may fill all of the order, or just the size of
the trade that occurred below the limit order price.

When the limit order price is first equal to the best bid in the market,
and the NYSE quote is also at the best bid, the dealer will record the
size of the NYSE bid. If the NYSE bid is behind the best bid, the dealer
will record zero NYSE size. He then will count volume traded everywhere
at the limit price. When that total volume exceeds the recorded NYSE
size, the dealer will execute the limit buy order for his own account.

The dealer also may place a limit order into the NYSE specialist's limit
order book at the same price. If the NYSE order fills, he will fill his
agency limit order. If he fills the agency order first, he will
immediately cancel the NYSE order. By placing the NYSE order, he ensures
that he will obtain no worse execution for the agency order than it
would have received if it had gone to the NYSE. He also can query the
SuperDot order-routing system for the size ahead of the order.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

To fully understand how payments for order flow affect retail traders,
we must consider more than just that the payments exist. We also must
consider how those payments are determined, and what effect they have on
retail brokerage commissions. The next subsection describes the economic
factors that determine payments for order flow, and how they affect
brokerage commissions.

## 25.2 THE ECONOMICS OF BEST EXECUTION

We start our discussion with a well-known property of all competitive
markets. In *perfectly competitive markets*, nobody earns profits in
excess of a fair rate of return on their dedicated resources. Perfectly
competitive markets arise when suppliers with identical cost functions
can freely enter or exit the market at low cost. When suppliers in such
markets make excess profits, they tend to lower price or provide better
service to attract more business. New suppliers also enter to share in
the excess profits. These responses drive excess profits to zero. When
suppliers earn less than their required profits, they raise prices, cut
service, or leave the market. These forces tend to raise profits. As a
result, excess profits are zero in equilibrium.

Consider now the application of this principle to wholesale and retail
order flow markets in which dealers and brokers, respectively, compete.
Both markets are highly competitive. Dealers compete with many other
dealers to fill orders; brokers likewise compete with many other brokers
to arrange trades. In both markets, entry and exit are not too costly.

Dealers compete to obtain wholesale order
flow from brokers. Orders are valuable to dealers when brokers are
unable or unwilling to enforce high execution standards. Dealing is
especially profitable when dealers can execute market orders at wide
bid/ask spreads. To earn these profits, however, dealers first must
obtain wholesale order flows from brokers. In perfect competition,
dealers will compete away any excess profits by offering various
inducements to brokers to obtain their client order flows. If executing
the order flow is profitable, the payments to brokers for obtaining that
order flow will be high.

Brokers compete to obtain order flow from their retail clients. Retail
order flows are valuable to brokers because they can preference these
orders to dealers in exchange for payments. They also can internalize
them and thereby directly profit from them. To earn these profits,
however, brokers must first obtain retail orders. In perfect
competition, brokers will compete away any excess profits by offering
their clients various inducements to obtain their orders. These
inducements include low commissions and a wide variety of ancillary
services, such as free or discounted investment information and
investment advice. If brokering retail order flow is profitable, the
inducements that brokers offer their clients to obtain their orders will
be valuable.

In perfectly competitive markets, if brokers or regulators demand that
dealers provide higher execution quality, wholesale payments for order
flow and retail inducements for order flow will fall. A trade-off thus
exists between execution quality and the price and level of brokerage
services offered. Holding everything else constant, if traders demand
greater price improvement for market orders, commissions will rise by a
corresponding amount. In perfectly competitive markets, net transaction
costs for small market orders (bid/ask spread plus commissions) will not
depend on how brokers and dealers define best execution.

Consider now the forces that determine the allocation of net transaction
costs between bid/ask spreads and commissions for market orders. We
start by explaining why retail traders pay more attention to low
commissions than to good prices. We then explain why bid/ask spreads
tend to be wide.

### 25.2.1 Low Commissions

Retail traders pay more attention to low commissions than to good prices
because you cannot buy anything that you cannot measure. Suppliers who
offer expensive quality that buyers cannot recognize can be undercut by
those who claim to do so but do not. If buyers cannot tell the
difference between high quality and low quality suppliers, suppliers can
give them low quality products regardless of what they promise. As a
result, buyers in such markets tend to purchase from low cost suppliers.
Price reflects the costs of low quality suppliers, and high quality
suppliers will not be able stay in business.

Consider the implications of this principle for retail market order
traders: Good execution for marketable orders means good prices and
quick service. Retail market order traders can easily audit response
times, but not the quality of the prices that they receive. Reliable
transaction cost measurement is very difficult for most traders, and
especially difficult for retail traders who trade in very active markets
(see [chapter 21](#part0034.html_ch21)). To effectively
measure execution price quality, traders must carefully assess their
execution prices in relation to nearby trade and quotation prices. Most
retail traders cannot easily access the relevant data or are unwilling
to spend the time necessary to analyze the data. Unless their trade
prices are unusually good or bad, most retail traders have no idea how
well their market orders execute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**SEC Rules 11Ac1-5 and
11Ac1-6**

To help retail investors deal with these measurement problems, the SEC
adopted two rules to improve public disclosure of order execution and
routing practices. Rule 11 Ac 1-5 requires market centers (dealers,
exchanges, and ECNs) to make monthly electronic reports that include
uniform statistical measures of execution quality. Rule 11 Ac 1-6
requires broker-dealers who route customer orders in equity and option
securities to make publicly available quarterly reports that, among
other things, identify the venues to which they route their customer
orders for execution.

These rules allow rating agencies to compile reports that rate dealers
and brokers. The resulting reports give dealers and brokers substantial
incentive to provide high quality service, at least as it is defined by
the uniform execution quality measures that they must report. 

Source: *SEC Release* no. *34-43590 (17 CFR Part 240) at
[[www.sec.gov/rules/final/34-43590.htm](http://www.sec.gov/wles/final/34-43590.htm)]*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The SEC Mandate**

"The Commission believes that broker-dealers deciding where to route or
execute small customer orders in listed or OTC securities must carefully
evaluate the extent to which this order flow would be afforded better
terms if executed in a market or with a market maker offering price
improvement opportunities. In conducting the requisite evaluation of its
internal order handling procedures, a broker-dealer must regularly and
rigorously examine execution quality likely to be obtained from the
different markets or market makers trading a security. If different
markets may be more suitable for different types of orders or particular
securities, the broker-dealer will also need to consider such factors."


*Source: SEC Release no. 34-37619A (17 CFR Part 240) at
[[www.sec.gov/rules/final/37619a.txt](http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/37619a.txt)]*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The execution audit problem for limit order traders is even more
difficult because it can be hard to determine whether a limit order that
matches or improves the NBBO should have executed. The uncertainty
associated with limit order executions greatly complicates the execution
audit problem.

Even if traders accurately estimate execution price quality, without
norms against which to compare their estimates, they cannot judge
whether their trades are well executed. To benchmark their trades, they
must trade with several brokerages, or they must compare their results
with other traders. In either event, they must be careful to compare
apples with apples and oranges with oranges because some securities are
harder to trade than are others. Retail traders rarely make such
comparisons because they are too costly.

Since retail clients generally do not know whether they receive good
executions on average, brokerage firms have little direct incentive to
demand that dealers provide better execution than whatever is generally
accepted as best execution. If they did, they would obtain fewer order
flow inducements from dealers. Instead, brokers accept the prevailing
best execution standards and use the resulting order flow inducements to
lower their brokerage commissions, which their clients can readily
audit.

The brokerage industry is not particularly concerned about this result.
When deciding to trade, most clients give more weight to visible
commission costs than to largely hidden bid/ask spreads that they pay.
The brokerage industry therefore prefers low commissions to good
executions because low commissions encourage clients to trade.

Although retail brokers have little incentive to demand higher best
execution standards, they have a very strong incentive to ensure that
dealers provide them with best execution. Brokers who do not ensure that
their customers obtain best execution expose themselves to regulatory
discipline and civil lawsuits. Brokers therefore pay close attention to
the quality of execution that they obtain for their clients. A small
consulting industry has grown to help brokers measure best execution and
manage their order preferencing relationships.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Industry Response**

Several consultants provide transaction audit services to retail
brokers. Brokers use these services to ensure that the dealers to whom
they route their orders provide them with best execution. The leading
consultants in this area are the Transaction Auditing Group (TAG) and
Market Systems Inc. (MSI).

Both companies nightly collect all transactions from their subscribing
brokers. They then compare them with trade price and quote data to
determine whether dealers properly handled the orders sent to them.
These analyses produce F + 1 *exception reports* that list trades which
do not conform to execution standards that the brokers specify. The
brokers use these reports to demand explanations or adjustments from
their dealers. Both companies also produce monthly and quarterly reports
that characterize various aspects of execution quality. 

Source: *Full descriptions of the TAG and MSI products and samples of
their reports appear at
[[www.tagaudit.com](http://www.tagaudit.com)] and
[[www.marketsystems.com](http://www.marketsystems.com)].*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Hot Order Flows**

Dealers who pay for order flow pay close attention to the orders they
receive. They regularly measure the profits that they make handling
these orders by considering, among other things, what happened to prices
after they received the orders. Order flows are hot when prices tend to
rise following the submissions of market buy orders and fall following
the submissions of market sell orders. When dealers find that they are
receiving hot order flows, they will not pay for them unless brokers
force them to take the hot orders in exchange for other, more profitable
orders. Obviously, brokers who force hot order flows on dealers will not
obtain as generous payments for order flow as they would have if they
sold only benign order flow. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25.2.2 Wide Bid/Ask Spreads

In [chapter 14](#part0025.html_ch14), we show that the
competition among dealers and limit order traders to attract orders
which traders route to the best displayed prices determines bid/ask
spreads. Spreads therefore critically depend on the orders that brokers
do not preference or internalize. Most brokers internalize and
preference all orders that interest dealers. They send the remaining
orders to whoever offers the best prices. These orders therefore are the
ones that determine bid/ask spreads.

Dealers who offer firm quotes do not want to receive orders from
well-informed traders, or from large traders, many of whom are well
informed. Well-informed traders force them to acquire positions on the
wrong side of the market. Large traders often price discriminate against
dealers and force them to take large positions that they cannot easily
divest.

Dealers expose themselves to well-informed traders and to large traders
when they offer firm quotes that any trader can take. They therefore
quote wider spreads than they would quote if they traded only with small
uninformed traders. The wider spreads compensate dealers for their
losses to informed traders and to price discriminating traders. These
spreads also compensate dealers for the costs incurred when searching
for traders to take large unwanted positions.

Small uninformed traders who trade at quoted bid and offer prices
therefore are indirectly hurt by the presence of well-informed traders
and large traders because of the wider spreads that they must pay. They
pay higher prices when buying and receive lower prices when selling than
they would otherwise pay and receive.

Payments for order flow benefit small uninformed traders when dealers
can determine who they are, and when the wholesale and retail markets
for order flow are highly competitive. When dealers can *skim the cream*
of the order flow by offering liquidity only to small uniformed traders,
payments for order flow ensure that these small traders ultimately
obtain lower commissions in compensation for the high spreads that they
pay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**We Will Meet or Beat
Any Advertised Price!**

Retailers often offer to meet or beat any advertised price in town for
the products they sell. In practice, they simply match the quoted price,
less some small amount.

Although this practice suggests that these retailers will aggressively
compete on price in order to obtain orders, it is actually quite
anticompetitive because it weakens the incentives to advertise low
prices. The incentives to offer low prices are strongest when the
retailers who offer them attract orders. When other retailers are
willing to match prices, retailers who offer the lowest prices do not
get as much order flow. Consumers would be better off if retailers could
attract orders only by offering the lowest prices, rather than by
offering to match the best prices. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 25.3 ANTICOMPETITIVE ASPECTS OF INTERNALIZATION AND PREFERENCING

Dealers and limit order traders will more likely offer aggressive prices
when their quotes and limit orders attract order flow than when they
have no effect on the orders that come to them. The internalization and
preferencing of order flows take orders away from traders who price
aggressively. Internalization and preferencing therefore place
aggressive dealers and limit order traders at a disadvantage, and
thereby weaken incentives to quote aggressively. Internalization and
preferencing thus increase bid/ask spreads relative to what they would
be if brokers routed all orders to the traders who offer the best
prices. This result would occur even if all traders were equally well
informed and traded the same size.

In Nasdaq stocks, brokers increasingly preference their market orders to
dealers and their limit orders to ECNs. The dealers pay brokers for
market orders and the ECNs pay brokers *liquidity fees* for standing
limit orders that execute. The liquidity fees are funded by the fees
that traders pay to the ECN when they use marketable orders to take
liquidity. Since ECNs represent their orders in Nasdaq, and since all
Nasdaq participants can trade with those orders, brokers can claim that
they are properly representing limit orders that they send to ECNs.

Limit orders in ECNs, however, are undoubtedly subject to serious
adverse selection. When they are at the NBBO, preferencing and
internalization ensure that they will not often be matched with
marketable orders. If prices move away from them, they also will not
execute. However, if prices move toward them, they will quickly execute,
and the traders who submitted these limit orders will regret trading.
Adverse selection hurts these traders by reducing their opportunities to
profit from trades that are followed by price changes which benefit
their positions.

Dealers and public limit order traders compete with each other to offer
liquidity. By decreasing the probability that limit orders will execute,
internalization and preferencing shift the balance of power in this
competition toward dealers.

## 25.4 INTERNAL ORDER CROSSING

Brokers cross orders internally when they arrange trades among their
clients. They may use formal order-driven trading systems or more
traditional methods to match orders that their clients give them.

Brokers arrange internal order crosses when they run crossing networks,
alternative trading systems, and electronic communications networks
(ECNs). Block brokers also often arrange internal order crosses.

Brokers who arrange internal crosses for their customers generally
provide them with services or service prices that they cannot otherwise
obtain. If their clients were not pleased with the combination of
service and price that they obtain, they generally would not use these
brokers.

Regulatory concerns about internal order crossing involve order exposure
and agency problems. The order exposure problem arises because brokers
who cross internally may expose their client
orders to their clients only, and not also to other traders who might be
willing to fill the orders if given the chance. Because brokers want to
receive commissions from both sides of the trade, they are reluctant to
expose their orders to traders represented by other brokers. The order
exposure problem concerns regulators because it makes the trade search
problem more difficult for buyers and sellers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Exclusive Listings**

Real estate agents usually try to arrange trades exclusively among their
clients when they first obtain a listing. To minimize the probability
that they may have to allow another broker to participate in the trade,
brokers almost always show newly listed properties to their clients
before they post them on multiple listing services, before they post a
for-sale sign, and before they advertise the property.

Real estate trade organizations are well aware of the problem. They
often set standards to which their members must adhere to prevent
serious abuses. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Brokers defend the practice by noting that they work harder to fill
orders when they get two commissions rather than one. Clients, however,
note that they need not work harder if they can easily find the
liquidity necessary to fill the order elsewhere.

The agency problem arises when brokers favor some clients over other
clients. The brokers may then arrange trades to the advantage of their
favored clients. If the harmed clients cannot easily estimate the costs
of their transaction, they may not easily recognize that they received
poor prices. Exposure of orders to markets helps protect traders from
these abuses.

You can view order preferencing as internal crosses. When a broker
preferences an order to a dealer, the broker essentially arranges a
trade between the client and the dealer. Although we do not normally
consider dealers to be clients of order preferencing brokers, this
characterization of their relationship is completely consistent with our
understanding of what brokers do. Payments for order flow are
essentially commissions that dealers pay brokers to arrange trades for
them. From this perspective, regulatory concerns about preferencing are
easy to understand. Regulators fear that brokers will favor
dealers---with whom they do much repeated business---over their clients,
with whom they do much less business on an individual basis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Open Outcry Principle**

Floor-based futures markets require that traders arrange all their
trades in the pit, in front of all other traders. By allowing anyone to
offer a better price, this procedure ensures that a broker cannot
arrange an unfair internal order cross.

Some futures markets now permit their traders to negotiate block trades
off-floor for qualified clients. The qualification standards ensure that
the clients are sophisticated traders who can look out for their own
interests. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regulators can prohibit internal crossing, or they can require that
brokers represent their clients' orders to the market. Although these
restrictions would consolidate order flows, they would not necessarily
be desirable. Brokers who cross orders internally often provide services
to their clients that they could not---or would not---provide if they
were required to expose their orders.

## 25.5 SUMMARY

Brokers internalize and preference order flows in order to extract value
from largely uninformed orders that execute at wide spreads. Payments
for order flow ensure that dealers in perfectly competitive wholesale
dealing markets do not obtain excess profits from trading these orders
at wide spreads. The commissions and other order flow inducements which
brokers must offer their clients to obtain their orders ensure that
brokers in perfectly competitive retail brokering markets do not profit
excessively from internalization or payments for order flow. When
competition is perfect in retail and wholesale order flow markets, low
commissions offset poor execution so that net prices do not ultimately
depend on best execution standards.

In no market is competition perfect, however. Dealers and brokers with
market power will exploit that power and ultimately obtain excess
profits from public traders. How much excess profit they obtain depends
on how competitive these markets are.

Wholesale dealers have some market power by virtue of the economies of
scale associated with their operations. These economies have led to
substantial consolidations through mergers and acquisitions in the
dealing segment of the trading industry. Although the remaining firms
undoubtedly increased their market power, the economies of scale have
also made them more efficient. These economies of scale make it
difficult for new entrants to compete aggressively in the wholesale
order flow market.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**ACATS**

Procedures that allow retail traders to transfer their accounts cheaply
from one broker to another are essential to prevent brokers from
accumulating market power over their retail clients. In the United
States, brokers and their clients use the *Automated Customer Account
Transfer Service* (ACATS), operated by the National Securities Clearing
Corporation to facilitate the transfer of customer accounts from broker
to broker. This automated system generally can move an account in less
than six business days. Verification of the trader's authorization to
request the change takes most of the time.

Brokers try to accumulate market power through various programs that
make switching brokers expensive for their clients. For example, some
brokers encourage their clients to store personal financial data with
them. Clients who have done so are reluctant to switch brokers because
they cannot transfer their data. 

*Source:
[[www.nasdr.com/2500_trans_proc.htm](http://www.nasdr.com/2500_trans_proc.htm)]*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Generally, the more convoluted a competitive system is, the less
efficient it will be. The wholesale and retail order flow market system
is a more complex competitive system than a centralized market. We
therefore can presume that it will be less efficient.

By taking orders away from common market mechanisms, internalization,
preferencing, and internal order crossing practices make it harder for
natural buyers and sellers to find each other. Internalization and
preferencing also weaken central markets by reducing incentives to quote
aggressively. These practices therefore must ultimately increase the
total transaction costs of all buy-side traders. Internalization and
preferencing, however, probably provide small uninformed traders with
better net prices---spread plus commission---than they would otherwise
obtain. Internal order crossing likewise provides many traders with
services that exchanges and brokers would not otherwise provide.
Regulators who would restrict internalization, order preferencing, or
internal order crossing must consider the trade-offs between the
benefits and costs of these practices.

Many people believe that the benefits some traders obtain from
internalization, preferencing, and order crossing practices do not
justify the damage these practices do to central markets. They would
instead prefer a *consolidated limit order book* market structure that
would bring all traders together in the same place. In [chapter
26](#part0040.html_ch26), we further consider the economic
forces that consolidate and fragment markets.

## 25.6 SOME POINTS TO REMEMBER

• Competition among dealers and brokers ensures that payments for order
flow reduce commissions.

• Retail customers can easily audit commissions but cannot easily audit
trade executions.

• Internalization and preferencing decrease incentives to quote
aggressively.

• Internalization and preferencing probably
provide better net prices (spread plus commission) to small uninformed
traders.

• Internalization and preferencing shift power from public limit order
traders to dealers.

• Brokers like internal order crosses because they often can collect
commissions from both sides of the trade.

## 25.7 QUESTIONS FOR THOUGHT

• Should the payments that dealers make for order flow depend on the
characteristics of the stocks that they trade? How so?

• The economic analysis of payments for order flow presented in the text
assumes that the wholesale and retail order flow markets are perfectly
competitive. How would the analysis differ if competition in these
markets is less than perfect?

• Why do you suppose that dealers who receive preferenced order flow and
broker-dealers who internalize order flow founded Primex?

• Why do dealers generally not pay to obtain limit orders?

• What effect does internalization have on price discovery in the
primary markets? How would prices be determined if all orders were
internalized?

• Why do corporate bond markets and equity markets have such different
market structures? How do the differences in their structures affect
their qualities?
